---
layout: default-main
title: The Babylonian Engine
---

For the Babylonian Engine tools, follow this [link](https://babylonian.herokuapp.com/#/)

Approximately five thousand years ago, the first cipher was invented between the rivers Tigris and Euphrates, in modern-day Iraq. The people there needed a more effective way to preserve and convey information over time and distances. They came up with a system of basic words and numbers. Slowly, that system developed and was able to convey more complex words, able to encode full human language. Their cipher was highly effective - it remained in use for more than three millennia.

<script src="https://embed.github.com/view/geojson/DigitalPasts/DigitalPasts.github.io/main/images/BEn/CIGS_v1_3_20210701.geojson"></script>

Alas, after it fell out of use, no one kept proper documentation, as happens to many good and successful projects. The knowledge of this cipher was lost for close to two thousand years. It was deciphered in the middle of the 19<sup>th</sup> century by the pure human efforts of [Edward Hincks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Hincks), [Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sir_Henry_Rawlinson,_1st_Baronet), [Hormuzd Rassam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hormuzd_Rassam), and [Sir Austen Henry Layard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austen_Henry_Layard). This cipher was named by modern scholars cuneiform. 

==picture of Behisutun, with close up to cuneiform==

Cuneiform writings informed us regarding many things we did not know about our past - the emerging cultures, states and empires of the ancient Near East, their thousands of years of history, literature, and scientific endeavors. Their contribution to world heritage does not stand on its own, either. Our astronomical knowledge and sixty-based numerical system are owed to the ancient Mesopotamians, to name a few, as well as further knowledge of neighboring cultures such as the Egyptians and Greeks, and the historical background for the emergence of monotheistic Judaism and the writings of the Bible. 

But is our knowledge so far derived from a representative sample of the data? Estimations on how many cuneiform texts are published to date, compared to excavated tablets discovered overall, are difficult to come by. Scholars estimate that written sources written in cuneiform constitute the second largest corpus of ancient texts, second only to Greek. Even the most optimistic estimations would have to admit that there are tens of thousands of texts waiting to be published, if not far more. They are sitting in their hundreds on museum shelves, and new excavations only continue to add to their number, and to their wait.

## Purpose

Nowadays, cuneiform is being redeciphered - by machines. The purpose of the Babylonian Engine is to create a platform for digital assyriology in the 21<sup>st</sup> century. One of the greatest obstacles of assyriology from the very inception of the field is an incredible amount of data, and at the same time an extremely limited number of people able to access it and make it accessible for the rest of the world. Traditional methods have not found a solution for this problem. Assyriological training is exhilarating, but complex, and requires the development of several specialized skills in ancient languages and scripts. Furthermore, the process of reading the texts is extremely time-consuming, and requires that many scholars devote a large portion of their time only to publishing texts. Yet, the countless tablets are of vital importance to world history and world heritage. They ought to be made accessible, be researched, and the information they hold should be widely spread and known.

The artificial intelligence revolution and general developments in computer science can give us the long awaited solutions for these problems. With enough data for training, machine learning models should be able to identify cuneiform signs from images, transliterate and translate cuneiform texts into modern languages with the press of a button, and even more textual post-processing. With enough online data, assyriologists will have easier and quicker access to hundreds of thousands of texts, and they will be able to create more comprehensive, more sustainable, and more reproducible research.

This is not to say that we will not need the specialized experts any more. Many of these experts will now also learn computer languages or collaborate with computer scientists, data experts and archivists. These research group's designs and models will always need to be guided and corrected by assyriologists. It is humans who tell the models what is right and what is wrong, and the models are there to help us to be consistent, work faster, or provide new insight. Furthermore, the models can be a huge help in training new generations of assyriologists by removing some of the difficulties involved in the training: learning the cuneiform script, as well as the dead languages written with it, and perhaps some modern programming languages. 

## Current tools

The Babylonian Engine plans to take different tasks that assyriologists perform on a regular basis, and create tools to make those tasks easier and faster to perform. We are developing AI models designed specifically for cuneiform texts, as well as general tools for assyriologists. Some of our models are already available for use: 

- **Atrahasis** is a machine learning model for restoring textual gaps in cuneiform texts, a common task since cuneiform tablets are often broken or abraded. It is currently trained on available digitized daily economic and administrative records from Babylonia under the Persian empire (6th-4th cent. BCE), prepared by F. Joannès and his team in the framework of the Achemenet program (CNRS, Nanterre; see more on the [Achemenet website](http://www.achemenet.com/fr/tree/?/sources-textuelles/textes-par-langues-et-ecritures/babylonien)). The model is able to correctly predict a missing word with 85% accuracy, and in 94% of cases the correct word appears in the top ten suggestions, on the trained corpus. Future versions of the model will be trained on additional corpora and more varied genres. Further information on the model can be found in our [published article](https://www.pnas.org/content/117/37/22743).

- **Akkademia** includes three machine learning models for transliterating and segmenting Unicode cuneiform signs. Cuneiform signs are polyvalent, meaning each sign has more than one possible reading, and the appropriate reading is determined by the preceding and following signs. We trained [HMM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_Markov_model), [MEMM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum-entropy_Markov_model) and [Bi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bidirectional_recurrent_neural_networks)[LSTM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_short-term_memory) machine learning models to determine the appropriate reading and segmentation automatically. For training we used the RINAP corpora (Royal Inscriptions of the Neo-Assyrian Period), which are available in JSON and XML/TEI formats thanks to the efforts of the Official Inscriptions of the Middle East in Antiquity (OIMEA) Munich Project of Karen Radner and Jamie Novotny, funded by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, available [here](http://oracc.museum.upenn.edu/rinap/). We achieve accuracy rates of 89.5% with HMM, 94% with MEMM, and 96.7% with BiLSTM on the trained corpora, and also surprisingly good results on texts from other genres and periods. We are currently training the models on other available corpora in JSON format from the [ORACC website](http://oracc.museum.upenn.edu/projectlist.html), to be released in a following version soon. Will plan to implement Akkademia as part of a bigger pipeline that will be able to take images of tablets, identify the cuneiform signs with their Unicode equivalents, and provide a transliteration and translation into a modern language. Further information on the models can be found in our [published article](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0240511).

Our tools can be accessed and freely used through this [link](https://babylonian.herokuapp.com/#/).

Further tools are currently under development: see our [Projects page](projects.html).

## Vision 

We plan that several years from now (although we cannot say for sure how many), when archaeologists and philologists are on an excavation site and discovering a new archive of cuneiform texts, they will be able to take a picture of each tablet, and get a rough transliteration and translation of the texts; a possible dating based on the handwriting, even a suggested scribe or scribal group; genre attribution; and more. We plan to have online editing tools for cuneiform texts, for researchers to edit and improve upon the engine's initial results. We plan to create virtual reality tours of the ancient capitals and steppe of Mesopotamia and Anatolia, and gamify the learning experience for students. This will revolutionize the field of assyriology from a niche subject to one that is better known and studied, expedite the research process significantly, and exponentially increase our knowledge of one the earliest and most prospering societies in the world.
